How is it?
Right.
This is Jill Jones talking to Phyllis Brown about Gwynfryn Village and Minera Quarry and
Gwynfryn School.
Hello, good afternoon Phyllis.
Hello.
Now would you like to start this by giving your name and date of birth please.
Oh dear, yes.
Well my name is Phyllis Brown and I am 93 years old.
I was born in 1926.
Right.
And I lived in Gwynfryn.
I was born in Gwynfryn.
Yes.
And I was born in Estedford Cossages which are one of the long houses, the old long houses
that the people had.
The house itself belonged to the line works, to the quarry, people of the quarry which
my father rented.
And what else was there?
Yes, so that's up at the top of Gwynfryn Village and these days looks into the quarry
a little bit.
It's at the head of a footpath that goes down into the workings.
That's right.
Yes.
I can remember living there of course and going down that little track that you're
talking about down to the village because my father worked in the quarry.
It was very hard work because at the time the money was very poor because he only had
– he didn't earn more than £2 a week while he was working.
And yes, he went down that path and we were sent down with tea for him when he was working.
So that's just the part that I remember going down to the quarry itself.
Yes.
The little cottage we had of course had no electricity so we had to go out through the
gate and across the moors to carry water.
We also had rainwater stored and we had to go all the way to the village, to Gwynfryn
Village to buy goods, to buy food.
Yes, so there was – I remember a post office in Gwynfryn Village.
Yes, that was in the one little store that was there.
That's it, the Pentra.
Yes.
There was another shop at the top of Bryn Maddock Road.
Ah yes, that's right, Sills Shop.
That would be quite a long way to walk.
Yes, quite a way.
Well, if you lived in Stadford it would be.
Yes, a good mile.
Because you've got to remember the extra walk up there.
True.
Yes.
So, did you go to school in Gwynfryn?
Yes, I went to school in Gwynfryn.
We went down through the village and over Pennwar Hill down to the bottom where the
school was located.
It was one building, one open space which was divided into three classrooms with sort
of petitions and so on.
That's it, yes.
Yes, it was quite good.
I remember being there.
Yes.
And then I went from there down to the grammar school at age 11, you know, usual times.
Oh yes, so you went to Grove Park, did you?
Yes, so I went to Grove Park and eventually I did train to teach.
Yes.
I went to all sorts of small schools around in what was then Denbighshire, still is Denbighshire
I think.
But I did stay in Gwynfryn for a while.
I remember the children there.
Yes.
I went to all sorts of little schools around the old Denbighshire which was interesting
really.
Yes.
But quite a way to travel every day.
Yes, yes.
So when you travelled to the other schools it was with the local bus services.
Yes, the local bus services, yes.
Yes, so Edward's buses went all the way up to Rithyn and most of the schools I went to
were within reach of Rithyn or somehow or other else I had to get another bus from there,
you know, a bit further.
Yes, yes.
That sounds very interesting.
Well.
Yes.
So while I think about it, was your first language Welsh language?
Yes, Welsh.
Yes, my first language is Welsh.
Yes.
Because the Gwynfryn School was actually built as a Welsh school.
It was known as the Council, Minera Council School.
That's correct.
As opposed to Minera Church School down the road which was all English.
Yes.
And yes, that's why they did, my mother went to that school and of course she had more
English, she was taught more English than Welsh really.
Yes.
My grandmother was, my other grandmother, not my Roger's grandmother, my other grandmother
was appointed the first caretaker cleaner of that school at the princely sum of £12
I think a year.
Oh my goodness.
Yes, it was a beautiful letter.
Yes.
A beautiful letter, yes.
Oh, so an official letter of appointment.
Yes, that's right.
That sounds really good.
Yes, very good.
I thought you'd be interested in that letter.
Yes, that sounds good.
So, how long were you teaching then, Phyllis?
Oh, well I did my 40 years altogether.
That's the requisite amount you're expected to work.
Yes, it is.
Yes.
So, and moving around you'd meet a lot of people.
Yes, you do.
You do see all sorts of people.
It's strange, isn't it?
I ended up in Brumbagh School eventually after many years and then I was lucky enough to
be appointed head in Brintay.
Oh yes.
So I was there for about, oh I don't know how many years now, 17 I think.
That's a long time.
Yes, it's a long time, isn't it?
Yes.
But at least it was a permanent position.
Yes, which previously they were a bit ad hoc, weren't they?
Yes, that's right.
I remember you teaching in Gwynfren School.
I was there for quite a while.
I was there for a number of years and I went away and I came back, I think.
Ah, right.
I was there on two separate occasions, I know, yes.
Yes, so that would account for everybody's...
Don't ask me for dates now because I've got one.
No, I remember you being in Gwynfren School when my family moved in the village and my
sister was in your class.
That's right.
And she remembers you very well.
That's good.
So, yes, so you were saying that your father worked in Minner, Lyme, Porran.
Yes, his father had worked there before him.
Yes, that's what I was going to inquire.
Edward Rogers was my grandfather and he'd married in 1870, I think that's the date.
He came to Gwynfren but of course it was known in those days as...
Oh dear, isn't it awful?
Yes, it was certainly not Gwynfren.
Anyway, they hadn't labelled it as Gwynfren then.
It was Minnera...
Oh, it would be Pentribice.
Pentribice was known locally but officially it was Minnera Mountain, I think.
Yes, Minnera Mountain or something like that.
So at that time, did your grandfather, do you know if he...
Well, he would work via St Edward's side of the quarry, yes?
No, he lived in the Minnera village, must have been going for...
because he was in one of the cottages on the village.
In the village?
Yes, so he was...
He'd always lived in the village itself.
So he would walk to work and it would be Minnera Lime Company.
Yes, he worked at Minnera Lime Company, that's right.
I don't know what his job was or anything but...
My father followed him when he was ready to leave school and he worked there as well.
Yes.
So it was a bit...
Yes, hard work but there was nothing else.
Well, there would only have been mining which wasn't...
there weren't an awful lot around Gwynryn, you see.
They were further out.
And that was no picnic, just going down the mine there.
No.
It was dangerous as well as anything else.
And there were some lead quarries there as well.
All sorts of quarries I think up on the mountain.
But the biggest one that came I think was the Lime quarry when that opened.
You've got dates.
Yes.
All I know is that we used to go down the path that you were talking about
with some tea, cold tea for my dad when it was very hot, you know, when the weather was very hot.
Yes.
That's the only thing I remember.
For the break times.
Yes, that's right.
Yes.
And I can just remember the alarms that were set off.
Oh yes.
When they were ready to bring down the rocks.
Yes.
But for a long time they worked all by hand.
And in much later years they had lorries and equipment that I suppose to move it.
Yes.
Oh, so you remember the railway train coming into the...
I remember the railway train coming as it came along the lower end of the Limeworks village,
do you know what I mean?
Yes.
The village itself.
Yes, alongside Nice Funlin Road.
Nice Funlin, that's it.
Yes.
Now in the earth.
And we used to go to an ant mine down there in that little village.
And we were able to see the train coming along.
Yes.
And going back again.
So that was quite interesting for children I suppose.
But we were all never to go beyond the gates.
Definitely.
Yes.
So, where are we now?
We're doing very nicely, Phyllis.
So, would you like to show me a couple of your photographs?
Right.
And this one is of the cottage, isn't it, where we lived?
Oh yes.
It was only a one room cottage and this was next door.
There's another one, there's another photograph which may in some ways be better.
But of course if I can find it, it's another thing.
Yes, here it is.
Oh no, that's the letter.
That's the letter.
Oh, about my grandmother's appointment.
Yes.
I tried to...
Yes, to mark things out for me.
Yes, to mark things off, you see.
Oh, that's good.
Yes, that's the one that's 12... how many pounds?
12 pounds a year.
I think that's great.
Mind you, she was glad to have it because she was a widow and she used to take her two
little ones, six and four year old, with her to school in the morning to clean everywhere
and set the fires off because they had fires then.
When I was there they just had stoves, you know.
Yes, yes, the enclosed stoves.
But in her day they were open fires.
So she had to go and take these two little toks with her and clean and set the fires
off.
Yes.
Ready for nine o'clock I suppose, isn't it?
Oh my goodness.
There is another one... oh this is it, I can see it hiding there.
That's the other... those are the other two pictures of the same place.
Yes.
Of the...
Yes, so you get the better idea of it being a long house.
I don't know which one you want or whether you want both, I don't know, but you can see
it's the same...
The same same place.
It is the same cottage.
Yes.
No electricity at all.
No.
No water.
It's hard to think.
Somebody told me electricity came to the village in 1938.
Yes, probably.
Yes, we'd moved by then, I think we were in the village.
Yes.
But...
And the sewage system came in 1970 something.
Yes, I can imagine that.
But water was laid on.
Yes.
But anyway, that's it.
Those are the... those two are the same as that one, you see.
So you can choose which ones you want, if you want either of them or any of them.
Yes, oh we could.
Yeah.
Now, have I got some more in here now?
Oh, that was my grandmother.
That's your grandmother.
The lady who... this letter was sent to my mother's mother, you see.
The others was the Rogerses, yeah.
And I don't think I've got any more in there.
Yeah.
Yes, these look like...
These are rather...
Family albums.
Family albums, well of course they've been put in, you know.
Yes.
That was at Squidward School of...
Oh yes.
1935.
Yes.
I'm on that, I'm there I think.
And then my brother's there.
Yes.
Yeah.
So that's what I've got there.
Right.
I don't know what there's anymore really, but I'll see what I've got here.
Yes.
No, I think...
You've got... it's all very well...
Well, everything has been put in, but it's not, you know, necessarily in the right order
now.
No, exactly what I want.
That's it.
That's fine.
Anyway, that's just an outing we had to Southport I think.
Oh yes.
That was, yeah.
Yes.
That was a, what are you, chapel of course we walked every day.
My father insisted we went.
We walked from the Steadford, which was quite a walk in itself really, to the chapel.
Yes.
And we went...
We attended the service in the morning and in the afternoon.
Sometimes it was Sunday school and sometimes it would be, you know, at different times.
Yes.
But I'm afraid I didn't shine in any way with singing or anything like that.
I left that to other members of the family I think.
Yes.
Oh yes.
It's always best to let other people do their best.
Well.
Yes.
If they feel comfortable that's it isn't it?
So I think that's all I've got.
Yes.
Well we've done very nicely, Phyllis.
I don't know whether I've told you enough.
Oh I think so.
I think you've done very, you've told us a great deal.
And so thank you very much.
Oh, you're very welcome.
Yes.
Thank you.